(techno music)
All right, so in this video,
we're going to take a look at the selection sort algorithm.
Now this algorithm divides the array
into sorted and unsorted partitions
just like bubble sort does.
And what we do is we traverse the array
and we look for the largest element
in the unsorted partition.
And when we find it,
we swap it with the last element in the unsorted partition.
And at that point,
that swapped element will be its correct sorted position.
And so just like with bubble sort,
at the beginning of the algorithm,
the entire array is unsorted
so the last unsorted index is six
and just like with bubble sort
we're going to grow the sorted partition from right to left.
We're going to initialise a largest field to zero
so when we start we say you know what,
20 is the largest element that we know about so far,
so whatever is at position zero will be the largest element.
And we're going to start
by comparing the element at position one
to whatever is at position zero,
so we're gonna start with i equal to one.
We're going to use i to traverse the unsorted partition
and find the largest element
and so these are our initial values.
The last unsorted index is six
because the entire array is unsorted, i is one.
We're gonna start our traversal here
and we've initialised the largest.
The largest will contain the index of the largest element.
Then the unsorted partition, that's initialised to zero.
So we're going to compare 35 to 20 and we're gonna say hey,
35 is larger than 20 and because of that,
we're going to change largest to one
and then we're gonna increment i to two
and we're gonna compare minus 15 to the largest element
which is now at position one
and we're gonna say well minus 15 is less than 35
so we're just gonna increment i to three.
We're gonna compare seven to the largest element
which is still at position one.
Seven is less than 35 so we just increment i to four.
We're now gonna compare 55 to 35
and 55 is greater than 35
so at this point we're going to change largest to four
because the largest element we found so far
in the unsorted partition is at index four
and we increment i to five.
We compare one to 55.
Well, one is less than 55 so we just increment i to six.
We compare minus 22 to 55.
Minus 22 is less than 55 so we don't do anything.
And at this point, i is equal to the last unsorted index
and so we have completed our first traversal of the array.
So we're going to swap the largest element
that we found in the unsorted partition
and that's at position four with the last element
in the unsorted partition and that's at position six.
So what we're gonna do is swap 55 and minus 22
and we have now completed our first traversal.
And at this point, 55 is in its correct sorted position
and so we're gonna decrement last unsorted index to five
and we're gonna re-initialize i to one
and we're going to say the largest element
in the unsorted partition is at position zero
and we repeat the process.
So we're going to compare 35 against 20.
35 is greater than 20 so we're gonna set largest to one.
Now we increment i to two
and we compare minus 15 against 35
'cause 35 is now the largest element.
Minus 15 is less than 35 so we just increment i to three.
Seven is less than 35 so we just increment i to four.
Minus 22 is less than 35 so we just increment i to five
and of course one is less than 35 and at this point,
i equals the last unsorted index
so we have completed our second traversal of the array.
And what we wanna do at this point
is swap the largest element, which is at position one,
with the last element in the unsorted partition,
which is at index five,
and so we're going to swap 35 and one.
And at this point,
35 and 55 are in their correct sorted positions
and we decrement the last unsorted index
and so now the last unsorted index
of the unsorted partition is four
and we would re-initialize largest to zero
and that should be a one.
We should re-initialize i to one.
And we're just gonna repeat the process.
We're gonna compare one to 20,
largest is gonna remain zero, et cetera,
until the entire array is sorted
and so this is how selection sort works
and it's called selection sort because on each traversal
where it's selecting the largest element
and removing it into the sorted partition.
So selection sort is an in-place algorithm.
It doesn't use any extra memory.
As I said with bubble sort,
it's okay to use a few extra fields
as long as the extra memory you're using
doesn't depend on the number of items you're sorting,
it's an in-place algorithm.
It's a quadratic algorithm
so it has a time complexity of O to the n squared
because we have n elements in the array
and for each element we traverse n elements,
so it's quadratic.
However, it doesn't require as much swapping as bubble sort.
You'll notice that we only swap once per traversal
and so selection sort will usually perform better
than bubble sort.
I say usually because depending on
you might have an array that's almost sorted
and so bubble sort doesn't have to swap that much,
but in the average case, all other things being equal,
generally selection sort will perform better.
However, selection sort is an unstable algorithm
and you can see why, right?
Because if we have duplicate elements,
there's no guarantee that their original order
relative to each other will be preserved
because on each pass,
we swapped the largest element
with whatever is occupying the last position
in the unsorted partition
and so it's very possible
that we could take the second duplicate value
and move it in front of its twin.
So because of that, selection sort is an unstable algorithm.
So if you need a stable sort algorithm,
then you don't wanna be using selection sort.
Okay, so that's it for the theory.
Let's move on and implement selection sort.
Ill see you in the next video.